README.md, before:

# Beaker Browser Specs Directory

Every specification has its own repo.
To discuss the content of the spec, open issues and PRs on the relevant repo.

## Directory

|Spec|Status|Description|
|-|-|-|
|[dat.json](https://github.com/datprotocol/dat.json)|Stable|The dat.json standard manifest file.|
|[Dat types](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/dat-types-spec)|In progress|Standard dat "type" values and their effects in Beaker.|
|[Dat identities](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/dat-identities-spec)|Draft|A solution for user identity and data management in Beaker.|
|[Beaker User FS](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker-fs-spec)|In progress|The filesystem for users' personal information.|
|[`unwalled.garden`](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/unwalled.garden)|Not yet started|A record protocol for Beaker's core applications and behaviors.|

## TODOs

Specs that need to be written but haven't yet.

 - DatArchive API. Refer to [the documentation](https://beakerbrowser.com/docs/apis/dat) for now.
 - PeerSockets API. Refer to [the PR](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker-core/pull/6) for now.
 - DatPubkeyFile API. Refer to [this gist](https://gist.github.com/pfrazee/e4a9d1bdd095564991b5b75a5fe49bd7) for now.

Commit message:

Add the index.json spec

README.md, after:

# Beaker Browser Specs Directory

Every specification has its own repo.
To discuss the content of the spec, open issues and PRs on the relevant repo.

## Directory

|Spec|Status|Description|
|-|-|-|
|[Beaker Filesystem](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker-fs-spec)|In progress|The filesystem for users' personal information.|
|[dat.json](https://github.com/datprotocol/dat.json)|Stable|The dat.json standard manifest file. Used to describe a dat.|
|[index.json](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/index-json-spec)|Draft|The index.json folder manifest file. Used to describe a folder.|
|[Dat types](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/dat-types-spec)|In progress|Standard dat "type" values and their effects in Beaker.|
|[Dat identities](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/dat-identities-spec)|Draft|A solution for user identity and data management in Beaker.|
|[`unwalled.garden`](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/unwalled.garden)|Not yet started|A record protocol for Beaker's core applications and behaviors.|

## TODOs

Specs that need to be written but haven't yet.

 - DatArchive API. Refer to [the documentation](https://beakerbrowser.com/docs/apis/dat) for now.
 - PeerSockets API. Refer to [the PR](https://github.com/beakerbrowser/beaker-core/pull/6) for now.
 - DatPubkeyFile API. Refer to [this gist](https://gist.github.com/pfrazee/e4a9d1bdd095564991b5b75a5fe49bd7) for now.
